# Migration guide from 3.2.0 to 3.X

Starting from version 3.X, Lamassu's Helm chart no longer uses `Ingress` resources to expose the services. Instead, it uses Envoy `Gateway` resources to route all incoming traffic to the services. This change allows for faster routing and reduces the number of containers running in the cluster. The following sections describe the changes that need to be made in order to successfully upgrade the Lamassu Helm chart.

Also, there are some changes in the configuration file as described below.

## Migrate from Ingress to Gateway

With this version, lamassu ships the different `HTTPRoutes` among other resources to configure an Envoy Gateway. Depending on the downtime requirements, the migration can be done in two ways:

- **Zero Downtime**: Start by deploying Envoy Gateway first, upgrade Lamassu and finally uninstall if needed the Nginx Ingress controller.

- **Downtime**: First delete the Nginx Ingress controller, deploy Envoy Gateway afterwards, and finally upgrade Lamassu.

### Uninstall Nginx Ingress Controller

Depending on the installation method used to deploy the Nginx Ingress controller, the uninstallation process may vary:

MicroK8s:
```bash
microk8s disable ingress
```

Baremetal:
```bash
kubectl delete -f https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes/ingress-nginx/controller-v1.12.0/deploy/static/provider/baremetal/deploy.yaml
```

Helm:
```bash
helm uninstall nginx-ingress-controller -n ingress-nginx
```

### Deploy Envoy Gateway

Deploy the Envoy Gateway by running the following commands:

```bash
cat > eg.yaml << "EOF"
config:
  envoyGateway:
    extensionApis:
      enableEnvoyPatchPolicy: true
EOF

helm install eg oci://docker.io/envoyproxy/gateway-helm --version v1.3.0 -n envoy-gateway-system --create-namespace -f eg.yaml --wait

cat <<EOF | kubectl apply -f -
  apiVersion: gateway.networking.k8s.io/v1
  kind: GatewayClass
  metadata:
    name: eg
  spec:
    controllerName: gateway.envoyproxy.io/gatewayclass-controller
EOF
```

## Update Helm values.yaml (aka lamassu.yaml)

The new helm chart version 3.X introduces some changes in the configuration file. The following sections describe the changes that need to be made in order to successfully upgrade the Lamassu Helm chart.

### REMOVED Ingress Configuration and services.apiGateway

Previously, for exposing the services, the Lamassu Helm chart used the `ingress` key to configure the Ingress resources. In the new version, the Ingress resources are no longer used. Instead, the Lamassu Helm chart uses the Envoy Gateway resources to route the traffic to the services. Therefore, the `ingress` key is no longer used in the configuration file and should be removed.

The `services.apiGateway` key is also removed from the configuration file. The API Gateway is now part of the Envoy Gateway configuration.

### Gateway Configuration

The new version of the Lamassu Helm chart introduces the `gateway` key to configure the Envoy Gateway resources. The `gateway` supports configuring 3 things:

- `addresses`: In scenarios not supporting LoadBalancer services, the `addresses` key should be used to configure the IP addresses of the nodes where the Envoy Gateway is running. The `addresses` key is a list of IP addresses in string format. In most use cases, you can obtain the list of IPs to use by running the following command:

```bash
hostname -I
```

- `ports`: The `ports` key is used to configure the ports that the Envoy Gateway should listen on. With this new version, lamassu will also expose an HTTP port as well as the already existing HTTPS port. The `ports` key allows configuring `https` witch defaults to 443 and `http` which defaults to 80. The `ports` key is a map with the following keys: `http` and `https`.

- `extraRouting`: If you need to expose other services through the Envoy Gateway, you can use the `extraRouting` key to configure additional routes. The `extraRouting` key is a list of items, where each item is a map with the following keys: `hostname`, `path`, `service`, `port`, and `tls`. The `tls` key is optional and defaults to `true`.

```yaml
gateway:
  addresses:
  - 172.31.3.116 
  ports: 
    http: 80
    https: 443
  extraRouting:
  - path: /auth
    name: auth
    target:
      host: auth-keycloak
      port: 80 # If no sidecar is used
```

### REMOVED services.openPolicyAgent

The `services.openPolicyAgent` key is removed from the configuration file. The Open Policy Agent is now part of the Envoy Gateway configuration.

### UPDATED services.ca.domain

Previously, the CA service only allowed configuring once domain that was used to generate the certificates. In the new version, the `services.ca.domains` key is now a list of domains. The CA service will generate a certificate for each domain in the list.

**OLD (3.2.0):**
```yaml
services:
  ca:
    domain: lamassu.local
```

**NEW (3.X):**
```yaml
services:
  ca:
    domains:
    - lamassu.local
    - lamassu2.local
```

### Updated tls.certManagerOptions:

With the new configuration it is possible to configure certificate generation in a more detailed way. The `tls.certManagerOptions` key is now a map with the following keys:

- `tls.certManagerOptions.certSpec.commonName`: The common name of the certificate.
- `tls.certManagerOptions.certSpec.hostnames`: A list of DNS names that should be included in the certificate.
- `tls.certManagerOptions.certSpec.addresses`: A list of IP addresses that should be included in the certificate.
- `tls.certManagerOptions.certSpec.duration`: The duration of the certificate.

**OLD (3.2.0):**
```yaml
tls:
  certManagerOptions:
    duration: 8760h
```

**NEW (3.X):**
```yaml
tls:
  certManagerOptions:
    certSpec:
      commonName: lamassu.local
      hostnames:
      - lamassu.local
      - lamassu2.local
      addresses:
      - 192.168.1.111
      duration: 8760h
```

### REMOVED services.services

The `services.services` key is removed from the configuration file. The services are now part of the Envoy Gateway configuration.